In this lesson, we'll set up an empty server using local and install WordPress manually.
You'll also learn how the files connect to the database by using the correct database user credentials
and use the WordPress included installer script to set up a fresh new site.
By the end of this video, you'll understand more about how WordPress works by installing it manually
on a working server starting from an empty database.
Let's do one more thing that's pretty fun and very educational, especially if you're working locally,
but you can also do this at your existing host if you as long as you have access to the files and to
the database, and that is to install WordPress manually.
WordPress used to have to be installed manually.
These days, pretty much every host and every local development environment will install WordPress automatically
for you.
It's pretty easy, but it does give you a good insight into again how WordPress works and how the files
connect to the database.
It's pretty rewarding to set up a site on your own totally manually, so let's just create an empty
server space to install WordPress locally using local, and so just click the Plus button and install
a new site.
I'm just going to choose a name for it, like WP Manual install something like that.
Click Continue.
Preferred is fine and then a user name and a password.
No, it's not something you really need to remember.
You just need to put it in there so it will create a site.
And as it's doing that, I'll explain that we're doing this so that local can connect the database with
the files, and it creates a database area and a working database that we can leverage and use to install
WordPress.
And that's just the way local works in different local development environments like map or desktop
server or something else.
There may be a different way to create an empty database that you can let the WordPress installer populate
with tables later.
You'll see how it works.
So now that that site is installed, let's just go ahead and open up the files by clicking this little
button.
And here I am at her local sites, WP Manual Install, go to the app folder and then under public.
You can see all of the WordPress core files.
Now I'm just going to select them all and hit delete and then my computer will just delete that whole
thing.
So I have an empty public folder as a part of this installation.
And now let's go to the database.
And it already says I can't find the database information in the WP config file.
Of course, we just deleted that.
So that's OK.
We're going to open admin or though so that we can access the database and all the tables that local
created for us.
Let's go ahead and click the checkbox at the top, which selects all the tables and then click Drop.
That is code for delete in my school land.
And so in that language, you know, when you hit drop that my SQL command to drop all the tables.
So now we have an empty database called local.
It has no tables.
And we also have an empty folder in the public folder for this application in local.
And so now really, all we have to do is populate this with the WordPress files.
Now you could go back to WordPress.org and you could download the files from here, but I already have
them downloaded.
Let's open my files explorer.
Is this where I have it?
Yep.
And so WordPress 5.9 and in the WordPress folder, I unzipped it, as you remember, and I'm just going
to take all the files and copy them over into the public folder right here.
Now, that should just take a couple of seconds.
And while that's doing that, we're going to have to go in and use either a text editor or a code editor
to go ahead and create a WP config file.
And we're going to have to edit the database credentials right here to connect it to that database.
And so here's an example of that WP sample TCP IP.
What I'm going to do is just close the things that I was working on before so that, you know, I don't
get confused.
But if we go back into the public folder, here it is now.
I could go to WP config dash sample and the first thing I'm going to do is just rename that by deleting
the dash sample part and letting it rename to WP config.
And that's Dot P.
It's not showing in my File Explorer here, but I know that's a file, and so I want to open this in
the Adam program or a text editor.
And so that's opened here in WP config.
I can see that it's in the right place and I'm going to edit the database credentials.
And now, if you forget what those are, you can just go back into local and it doesn't tell you what
they are here.
But in another of your websites, it's always standard in local.
They use local host for the host.
And then the user is root and root, and then the database name is just local.
And so we can use that as a reference when we go here.
The database name is local.
The username is root.
And the password is route.
And the database host is local host, so click Control SE to save a little asterisk disappears.
And now what I have in local is and here's my files in public.
I have a WP config file that is configured to attach to the existing database.
And so really, that's all I need to do if I just hit open site here and I have to go to the correct
site.
This manual install site, if I go up and say, I wonder if it sees the database now.
Yeah.
So now it sees the correct database credentials, and all I have to do is go to the open site button
is trying to open the site and the WordPress program hasn't been installed yet.
So what you'll see is the WordPress installer script running inside your browser.
It first starts with a selection of the language that you want WordPress to use.
And so I use that and then you just choose the site title and username password and an email.
So this is the welcome to the famous five minute WordPress installation process.
It is pretty easy.
And so this was called what was it called again?
Let's look WP manual install.
Just so don't confuse myself the VPI manual install, and I'll give my my name for a username.
You can use any password you want, but I'll just use one that I can remember.
It doesn't have to be very strong because this is just a local site.
Now the email, it's important if we want this to work in local for receiving email addresses that we
use the standard local email address that's used within this local development environment.
And we've used that before in one of the previous lessons.
But you can find it by going up here and looking at preferences and then under new site defaults, the
admin email that's a standard email address for local installations is this.
So I'll just use Control C to copy that and then go back to my installation here.
Paste it right in there, and I don't need to use this search engine visibility discouraged checkbox.
You might use that if you're developing a site at a live host, but I don't need that, so I'll just
click Install WordPress.
And then while that's happening, what's what it's doing here is it's going through a script included
in WordPress now that it's connected to a database.
It's going to create all the tables within the database and populate them with the rows that are needed
for a fresh WordPress installation.
And there we go.
Success.
So it tells me my username.
It tells me I had a chosen password that I needed to remember.
So if I just hit log in and put in my credentials.
That should log me into the WordPress dashboard and a fresh and clean WordPress website.
Great.
There it is.
I can see it's under this name that local had given us before.
Now, if we go back to admin, which is our database manager and just refresh the page, that should
show us all the tables.
Now here they are.
These are the tables that WordPress installed as a part of this site here under local.
And if you click right, right click and click View Site.
Open it in a new tab, you can see that it's a fresh WordPress installation using the default 2022 theme
and seems to be all working.
That looks great.
The dashboard was somewhere I could log into.
Here's the sample page.
Yeah, that looks great.
All right, well, we've just installed WordPress manually, as long as you have a working server where
you can have files and a database connected.
You can install WordPress manually locally or anywhere you want.